labs/lab05/lab05.adoc, before:

ifdef::env-github[]
:tip-caption: :bulb:
:note-caption: :information_source:
:important-caption: :heavy_exclamation_mark:
:caution-caption: :fire:
:warning-caption: :warning:
endif::[]
:spring-boot-version: 1.5.9
:spring-cloud-services-dependencies-version: 1.6.3.RELEASE
:spring-cloud-dependencies-version: Edgware.RELEASE

= Adding Spring Cloud Service Registration and Discovery

== Overview

[.lead]
In this lab we'll utilize Spring Boot and Spring Cloud to allow our application to register itself with a service registry.  To do this we'll also need to provision an instance of a Service Registry using Pivotal Cloud Foundry Spring Cloud Services, which is based on https://github.com/Netflix/eureka[Eureka], Netflix’s Service Discovery server and client.  We'll also add a simple client application that looks up our application from the Service Registry and makes requests to our `Cities` service.

== Update _Cloud-Native-Spring_ Boot Application to Register with Service Registry

. These features are added by adding `spring-cloud-services-starter-service-registry` to the classpath. Add the following spring cloud services to your Maven project dependencies:
+
.cloud-native-spring/pom.xml
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.pivotal.spring.cloud</groupId>
  <artifactId>spring-cloud-services-starter-service-registry</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

. Thanks to Spring Cloud, instructing your application to register with Service Registry is as simple as adding a single annotation to your app! Add an @EnableDiscoveryClient annotation to the `io.pivotal.cloudnativespring.CloudNativeSpringApplication` class:
+
.cloud-native-spring/src/main/java/io/pivotal/cloudnativespring/CloudNativeSpringApplication.java
[source,java,numbered]
----
@SpringBootApplication
@RestController
@EnableJpaRepositories
@EnableDiscoveryClient // <---- Add this
@Import(RepositoryRestMvcAutoConfiguration.class)
public class CloudNativeSpringApplication {
    [...]
}
----
+
Completed:
+
[source,java,numbered]
----
package io.pivotal.cloudnativespring;

import org.springframework.beans.factory.annotation.Value;
import org.springframework.boot.SpringApplication;
import org.springframework.boot.autoconfigure.SpringBootApplication;
import org.springframework.cloud.client.discovery.EnableDiscoveryClient;
import org.springframework.context.annotation.Import;
import org.springframework.data.jpa.repository.config.EnableJpaRepositories;
import org.springframework.data.rest.webmvc.config.RepositoryRestMvcConfiguration;
import org.springframework.web.bind.annotation.RequestMapping;
import org.springframework.web.bind.annotation.RestController;

@SpringBootApplication
@RestController
@EnableJpaRepositories
@EnableDiscoveryClient
@Import(RepositoryRestMvcConfiguration.class)
public class CloudNativeSpringApplication {

    @Value("${greeting:Hola}")
    private String greeting;

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        SpringApplication.run(CloudNativeSpringApplication.class, args);
    }

    @RequestMapping("/")
    public String hello() {
        return greeting + " World!";
    }
}
----

== Create Spring Cloud Service Registry instance and deploy application

. Now that our application is ready to read registry with a Service Registry instance, we need to deploy one!  This can be done through Cloud Foundry using the services marketplace.  Previously we did this through the Marketplace UI, but this time we will use the Cloud Foundry CLI (though we could also do this through the UI):
+
[source,bash]
----
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work/cloud-native-spring $ cf create-service p-service-registry standard service-registry
----

. After you create the service registry instance navigate to your Cloud Foundry _space_ in the Apps Manager UI and refresh the page.  You should now see the newly create `service-registry` instance.  Select the manage link to view the registry dashboard.  Note that there are not any registered applications at the moment:
+
image::images/registry1.jpg[]

. We will now bind our application to our service-registry within our Cloud Foundry deployment manifest.  Add the additional reference the services list in our Cloud Foundry manifest:
+
.cloud-native-spring/manifest.yml
[source,yml]
----
  services:
  - config-server
  - service-registry # <-- Add this
----
+
Complete:
+
[source,yml]
----
---
applications:
- name: cloud-native-spring-lab05
  random-route: true
  memory: 768M
  path: target/cloud-native-spring-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT-exec.jar
  timeout: 180
  env:
    JAVA_OPTS: -Djava.security.egd=file:///dev/urandom
  services:
  - config-server
  - service-registry
----

== Deploy and test application

. For the 2nd half of this lab we'll need our `cloud-native-spring` Maven artifact accessible in our local Maven repository. Rebuild and install the artifact with the following command:
+
[source,bash]
----
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work/cloud-native-spring $ ./mvnw install
----

. Push application into Cloud Foundry
+
[source,bash]
----
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work/cloud-native-spring $ cf push
----

. If we now test our application URLs we will no change.  However, if we view the Service Registry dashboard (accessible from the *Manage* link in Apps Manager) you will see that a service named `CLOUD-NATIVE-SPRING` has registered:
+
image::images/registry2.jpg[]

. Next we'll create a simple UI application that will read the service registry to discover the location of our cities REST service and connect.

== Create another Spring Boot Project as a Client UI

. Browse to https://start.spring.io[Spring Initializr]

. Generate a `Maven Project` with `Java` and Spring Boot `{spring-boot-version}`

. Fill out the *Project metadata* fields as follows:

Group:: `io.pivotal`
Artifact:: cloud-native-spring-ui

. In the dependencies section, add each of the following manually:

- *Vaadin*
- *Actuator*
- *Feign*
- *Service Registry (PCF)*

. Click the _Generate Project_ button and your browser will download the `cloud-native-spring-ui.zip` file.

. Copy then unpack the downloaded zip file to `CN-Workshop/labs/my_work/cloud-native-spring-ui`
+
[source,bash]
----
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work $ cp ~/Downloads/cloud-native-spring-ui.zip .
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work $ unzip cloud-native-spring-ui.zip
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work $ cd cloud-native-spring-ui
----
+
Your directory structure should now look like:
+
[source,bash]
----
CN-Workshop:
├── labs
│   ├── my_work
│   │   ├── cloud-native-spring
│   │   ├── cloud-native-spring-ui
----

. Rename `application.properties` to `application.yml`
+
Spring Boot uses the `application.properties`/`application.yml` file to specify various properties which configure the behavior of your application.  By default, Spring Initializr (start.spring.io) creates a project with an `application.properties` file, however, throughout this workshop we will be https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/reference/html/boot-features-external-config.html#boot-features-external-config-yaml[using YAML instead of Properties].
+
[source,bash]
----
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work/cloud-native-spring-ui $ mv src/main/resources/application.properties src/main/resources/application.yml
----

. Import the project’s pom.xml into your editor/IDE of choice.

. Because we politely asked https://start.spring.io[Spring Initializr] to include *Service Registry (PCF)*, our Maven project has already been configured with the appropriate Spring Cloud Services dependencies:
+
.cloud-native-spring-ui/pom.xml
[source,xml,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
----
<project>
  [...]
  <dependencies>
    [...]
    <dependency>
      <groupId>io.pivotal.spring.cloud</groupId>
      <artifactId>spring-cloud-services-starter-service-registry</artifactId>
    </dependency>
    [...]
  </dependencies>
  [...]
  <dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
      [...]
      <dependency>
        <groupId>io.pivotal.spring.cloud</groupId>
        <artifactId>spring-cloud-services-dependencies</artifactId>
        <version>{spring-cloud-services-dependencies-version}</version>
        <type>pom</type>
        <scope>import</scope>
      </dependency>
      <dependency>
        <groupId>org.springframework.cloud</groupId>
        <artifactId>spring-cloud-dependencies</artifactId>
        <version>{spring-cloud-dependencies-version}</version>
        <type>pom</type>
        <scope>import</scope>
      </dependency>
      [...]
    </dependencies>
  </dependencyManagement>
  [...]
</project>
----

. To get a bit of code reuse, we'll be using the `City` domain object from our main `cloud-native-spring` Spring Boot application. We don't want to pull in any of its transitive dependencies so we explicitly exclude them, however, we do still need `spring-boot-starter-data-rest` to consume the `/cities` service so we add that one in.
+
Add the following to the Maven project dependencies:
+
.cloud-native-spring-ui/pom.xml
[source,xml]
----
<project>
  [...]
  <dependencies>
    [...]
    <dependency>
      <groupId>io.pivotal</groupId>
      <artifactId>cloud-native-spring</artifactId>
      <version>0.0.1-SNAPSHOT</version>
      <exclusions>
        <exclusion>
          <groupId>*</groupId>
          <artifactId>*</artifactId>
        </exclusion>
      </exclusions>
    </dependency>
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
      <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-data-rest</artifactId>
    </dependency>
    [...]
  </dependencies>
  [...]
</project>
----

+
Finally, for consistency's sake, we'll produce an exec classified artifact as we did for cloud-native-spring. Your build section should now include:
+
[source,xml]
----
<project>
  [...]
  <build>
    <plugins>
      [...]
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
        <artifactId>spring-boot-maven-plugin</artifactId>
        <executions>
          <execution>
            <goals>
              <goal>build-info</goal>
            </goals>
          </execution>
        </executions>
        <configuration>
          <classifier>exec</classifier>
        </configuration>
      </plugin>
      [...]
    </plugins>
  </build>
  [...]
</project
----

. Since this UI is going to consume REST services, its an awesome opportunity to use Feign.  Feign will handle *ALL* the work of invoking our services and marshalling/unmarshalling JSON into domain objects.  We'll add a Feign Client interface into our app.  Take note of how Feign references the downstream service; its only the name of the service it will lookup from Service Registry.
+
Add the following interface declaration to the `CloudNativeSpringUiApplication` class:
+
[source,java,numbered]
----
    @FeignClient("cloud-native-spring")
    public interface CityClient {
        @GetMapping(value = "/cities", consumes = "application/hal+json")
        Resources<City> getCities();
    }
----
+
We'll also need to add a few annotations to our boot application:
+
[source,java,numbered]
----
@SpringBootApplication
@EnableFeignClients  // <---- Add this
@EnableDiscoveryClient  // <---- And this
public class CloudNativeSpringUiApplication {
----
+
Completed:
+
[source,java,numbered]
----
package io.pivotal.cloudnativespringui;

import org.springframework.boot.SpringApplication;
import org.springframework.boot.autoconfigure.SpringBootApplication;
import org.springframework.cloud.client.discovery.EnableDiscoveryClient;
import org.springframework.cloud.netflix.feign.EnableFeignClients;
import org.springframework.cloud.netflix.feign.FeignClient;
import org.springframework.hateoas.Resources;
import org.springframework.web.bind.annotation.GetMapping;

import io.pivotal.cloudnativespring.domain.City;

@SpringBootApplication
@EnableFeignClients
@EnableDiscoveryClient
public class CloudNativeSpringUiApplication {

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        SpringApplication.run(CloudNativeSpringUiApplication.class, args);
    }

    @FeignClient("cloud-native-spring")
    public interface CityClient {

        @GetMapping(value = "/cities", consumes = "application/hal+json")
        Resources<City> getCities();
    }
}
----

. Next we'll create a Vaadin UI for rendering our data.  The point of this workshop isn't to go into detail on creating UIs; for now suffice to say that Vaadin is a great tool for quickly creating User Interfaces.  Our UI will consume our Feign client we just created.  Create the `io.pivotal.cloudnativespringui.AppUI` class and paste the following code:
+
.cloud-native-spring-ui/src/main/java/io/pivotal/cloudnativespringui/AppUI.java
[source,java,numbered]
----
package io.pivotal.cloudnativespringui;

import java.util.ArrayList;
import java.util.Collection;

import org.springframework.beans.factory.annotation.Autowired;

import com.vaadin.annotations.Theme;
import com.vaadin.server.VaadinRequest;
import com.vaadin.spring.annotation.SpringUI;
import com.vaadin.ui.Grid;
import com.vaadin.ui.UI;

import io.pivotal.cloudnativespring.domain.City;
import io.pivotal.cloudnativespringui.CloudNativeSpringUiApplication.CityClient;

@SpringUI
@Theme("valo")
public class AppUI extends UI {

    private final CityClient cityClient;

    private final Grid<City> grid;

    @Autowired
    public AppUI(CityClient client) {
        this.cityClient = client;
        grid = new Grid<>(City.class);
    }

    @Override
    protected void init(VaadinRequest request) {
        setContent(grid);
        grid.setWidth(100, Unit.PERCENTAGE);
        grid.setHeight(100, Unit.PERCENTAGE);
        Collection<City> collection = new ArrayList<>();
        cityClient.getCities().forEach(collection::add);
        grid.setItems(collection);
    }
}
----

. We'll also want to give our UI App a name so that it can register properly with the Service Registry and potentially use cloud config in the future. The `spring-cloud-services-starter-service-registry` dependency pulls in `spring-security`, so we'll also need to disable security for our sample ui.
+
Add the following to your Spring Boot configuration:
+
.cloud-native-spring-ui/src/main/resources/application.yml
[source,yaml]
----
spring:
  application:
    name: cloud-native-spring-ui

security:
  basic:
    enabled: false
----

== Deploy and test application

. Build the application.
+
[source,bash]
----
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work/cloud-native-spring-ui $ ./mvnw package
----

. Create a Cloud Foundry application manifest:
+
[source,bash]
----
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work/cloud-native-spring-ui $ touch manifest.yml
----
+
Add application metadata:
+
[source,yaml]
----
---
applications:
- name: cloud-native-spring-ui
  random-route: true
  memory: 768M
  path: target/cloud-native-spring-ui-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT-exec.jar
  env:
    JAVA_OPTS: -Djava.security.egd=file:///dev/urandom
  services:
  - service-registry
----

. Push application into Cloud Foundry
+
[source,bash]
----
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work/cloud-native-spring-ui $ cf push
----

. Test your application by navigating to the root URL of the application, which will invoke Vaadin UI.  You should now see a table listing the first set of rows returned from the cities microservice:
+
image::images/ui.jpg[]

. From a commandline stop the cloud-native-spring microservice (the original city service, not the new UI)
+
[source,bash]
----
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work/cloud-native-spring $ cf stop cloud-native-spring
----
. Refresh the UI app.  What happens?  Now you get a nasty error that is not very user friendly!

. Next we'll learn how to make our UI Application more resilient in the case that our downstream services are unavailable.

Commit message:

1) added -mysqldb back into the mix as each lab is supposed to be a progression and we opted for cloud-native db 2) cleaned up doc for lab04 3) added server.port=8081 to support running ui in local mode (otherwise the ports conflict) 4) changed the image to be current with what they'll see when they manage the service registry and 5) cleaned up the lab05 docs but have not yet added the spring cloud cli section. Will pick that up in the morning.

labs/lab05/lab05.adoc, after:

ifdef::env-github[]
:tip-caption: :bulb:
:note-caption: :information_source:
:important-caption: :heavy_exclamation_mark:
:caution-caption: :fire:
:warning-caption: :warning:
endif::[]
:spring-boot-version: 1.5.9
:spring-cloud-services-dependencies-version: 1.6.3.RELEASE
:spring-cloud-dependencies-version: Edgware.RELEASE

= Adding Spring Cloud Service Registration and Discovery

== Overview

[.lead]
In this lab we'll utilize Spring Boot and Spring Cloud to allow our application to register itself with a service registry.  To do this we'll also need to provision an instance of a Service Registry using Pivotal Cloud Foundry Spring Cloud Services, which is based on https://github.com/Netflix/eureka[Eureka], Netflix’s Service Discovery server and client.  We'll also add a simple client application that looks up our application from the Service Registry and makes requests to our `Cities` service.

== Update _Cloud-Native-Spring_ Boot Application to Register with Service Registry

. These features are added by adding `spring-cloud-services-starter-service-registry` to the classpath. Add the following spring cloud services to your Maven project dependencies:
+
.cloud-native-spring/pom.xml
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.pivotal.spring.cloud</groupId>
  <artifactId>spring-cloud-services-starter-service-registry</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

. Thanks to Spring Cloud, instructing your application to register with Service Registry is as simple as adding a single annotation to your app! Add an @EnableDiscoveryClient annotation to the `io.pivotal.cloudnativespring.CloudNativeSpringApplication` class:
+
.cloud-native-spring/src/main/java/io/pivotal/cloudnativespring/CloudNativeSpringApplication.java
[source,java,numbered]
----
@SpringBootApplication
@RestController
@EnableJpaRepositories
@EnableDiscoveryClient // <---- Add this
@Import(RepositoryRestMvcAutoConfiguration.class)
@EnableAutoConfiguration(exclude = { SecurityAutoConfiguration.class }) // To Bypass Security in the Demo Application
public class CloudNativeSpringApplication {
    [...]
}
----
+
Completed:
+
[source,java,numbered]
----
package io.pivotal.cloudnativespring;

import org.springframework.beans.factory.annotation.Value;
import org.springframework.boot.SpringApplication;
import org.springframework.boot.autoconfigure.SpringBootApplication;
import org.springframework.cloud.client.discovery.EnableDiscoveryClient;
import org.springframework.context.annotation.Import;
import org.springframework.data.jpa.repository.config.EnableJpaRepositories;
import org.springframework.data.rest.webmvc.config.RepositoryRestMvcConfiguration;
import org.springframework.web.bind.annotation.RequestMapping;
import org.springframework.web.bind.annotation.RestController;

@SpringBootApplication
@RestController
@EnableJpaRepositories
@EnableDiscoveryClient
@Import(RepositoryRestMvcConfiguration.class)
@EnableAutoConfiguration(exclude = { SecurityAutoConfiguration.class }) // To Bypass Security in the Demo Application
public class CloudNativeSpringApplication {

    @Value("${greeting:Hola}")
    private String greeting;

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        SpringApplication.run(CloudNativeSpringApplication.class, args);
    }

    @RequestMapping("/")
    public String hello() {
        return greeting + " World!";
    }
}
----

== Create Spring Cloud Service Registry instance and deploy application

. Now that our application is ready to read registry with a Service Registry instance, we need to deploy one!  This can be done through Cloud Foundry using the services marketplace.  Previously we did this through the Marketplace UI, but this time we will use the Cloud Foundry CLI (though we could also do this through the UI):
+
[source,bash]
----
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work/cloud-native-spring $ cf create-service p-service-registry standard service-registry
----

. After you create the service registry instance navigate to your Cloud Foundry _space_ in the Apps Manager UI and refresh the page.  You should now see the newly create `service-registry` instance.  Select the manage link to view the registry dashboard.  Note that there are not any registered applications at the moment:
+
image::images/registry1.jpg[]

. We will now bind our application to our service-registry within our Cloud Foundry deployment manifest.  Add the additional reference the services list in our Cloud Foundry manifest:
+
.cloud-native-spring/manifest.yml
[source,yml]
----
  services:
  - mysqldb
  - config-server
  - service-registry # <-- Add this
----
+
Complete:
+
[source,yml]
----
---
applications:
- name: cloud-native-spring-lab05
  random-route: true
  memory: 768M
  path: target/cloud-native-spring-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT-exec.jar
  timeout: 180
  env:
    JAVA_OPTS: -Djava.security.egd=file:///dev/urandom
  services:
  - mysqldb
  - config-server
  - service-registry
----

== Deploy and test application

. For the 2nd half of this lab we'll need our `cloud-native-spring` Maven artifact accessible in our local Maven repository. Rebuild and install the artifact with the following command:
+
[source,bash]
----
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work/cloud-native-spring $ ./mvnw install
----

. Push application into Cloud Foundry
+
[source,bash]
----
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work/cloud-native-spring $ cf push
----

. If we now test our application URLs we will not see any changes.  However, if we view the Service Registry dashboard (accessible from the *Manage* link in Apps Manager) you will see that a service named `CLOUD-NATIVE-SPRING-LAB05` has registered:
+
image::images/registry2.jpg[]

. Next we'll create a simple UI application that will read the service registry to discover the location of our cities REST service and connect.

== Create another Spring Boot Project as a Client UI

. Browse to https://start.spring.io[Spring Initializr]

. Generate a `Maven Project` with `Java` and Spring Boot `{spring-boot-version}`

. Fill out the *Project metadata* fields as follows:

Group:: `io.pivotal`
Artifact:: cloud-native-spring-ui

. In the dependencies section, add each of the following manually:

- *Vaadin*
- *Actuator*
- *Feign*
- *Service Registry (PCF)*

. Click the _Generate Project_ button and your browser will download the `cloud-native-spring-ui.zip` file.

. Copy then unpack the downloaded zip file to `CN-Workshop/labs/my_work/cloud-native-spring-ui`
+
[source,bash]
----
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work $ cp ~/Downloads/cloud-native-spring-ui.zip .
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work $ unzip cloud-native-spring-ui.zip
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work $ cd cloud-native-spring-ui
----
+
Your directory structure should now look like:
+
[source,bash]
----
CN-Workshop:
├── labs
│   ├── my_work
│   │   ├── cloud-native-spring-lab05
│   │   ├── cloud-native-spring-ui
----

. Rename `application.properties` to `application.yml`
+
Spring Boot uses the `application.properties`/`application.yml` file to specify various properties which configure the behavior of your application.  By default, Spring Initializr (start.spring.io) creates a project with an `application.properties` file, however, throughout this workshop we will be https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/reference/html/boot-features-external-config.html#boot-features-external-config-yaml[using YAML instead of Properties].
+
[source,bash]
----
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work/cloud-native-spring-ui $ mv src/main/resources/application.properties src/main/resources/application.yml
----

. Import the project’s pom.xml into your editor/IDE of choice.

. Because we politely asked https://start.spring.io[Spring Initializr] to include *Service Registry (PCF)*, our Maven project has already been configured with the appropriate Spring Cloud Services dependencies:
+
.cloud-native-spring-ui/pom.xml
[source,xml,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
----
<project>
  [...]
  <dependencies>
    [...]
    <dependency>
      <groupId>io.pivotal.spring.cloud</groupId>
      <artifactId>spring-cloud-services-starter-service-registry</artifactId>
    </dependency>
    [...]
  </dependencies>
  [...]
  <dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
      [...]
      <dependency>
        <groupId>io.pivotal.spring.cloud</groupId>
        <artifactId>spring-cloud-services-dependencies</artifactId>
        <version>{spring-cloud-services-dependencies-version}</version>
        <type>pom</type>
        <scope>import</scope>
      </dependency>
      <dependency>
        <groupId>org.springframework.cloud</groupId>
        <artifactId>spring-cloud-dependencies</artifactId>
        <version>{spring-cloud-dependencies-version}</version>
        <type>pom</type>
        <scope>import</scope>
      </dependency>
      [...]
    </dependencies>
  </dependencyManagement>
  [...]
</project>
----

. To get a bit of code reuse, we'll be using the `City` domain object from our main `cloud-native-spring` Spring Boot application. We don't want to pull in any of its transitive dependencies so we explicitly exclude them, however, we do still need `spring-boot-starter-data-rest` to consume the `/cities` service so we add that one in.
+
Add the following to the Maven project dependencies:
+
.cloud-native-spring-ui/pom.xml
[source,xml]
----
<project>
  [...]
  <dependencies>
    [...]
    <dependency>
      <groupId>io.pivotal</groupId>
      <artifactId>cloud-native-spring</artifactId>
      <version>0.0.1-SNAPSHOT</version>
      <exclusions>
        <exclusion>
          <groupId>*</groupId>
          <artifactId>*</artifactId>
        </exclusion>
      </exclusions>
    </dependency>
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
      <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-data-rest</artifactId>
    </dependency>
    [...]
  </dependencies>
  [...]
</project>
----

+
Finally, for consistency's sake, we'll produce an exec classified artifact as we did for cloud-native-spring. Your build section should now include:
+
[source,xml]
----
<project>
  [...]
  <build>
    <plugins>
      [...]
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
        <artifactId>spring-boot-maven-plugin</artifactId>
        <executions>
          <execution>
            <goals>
              <goal>build-info</goal>
            </goals>
          </execution>
        </executions>
        <configuration>
          <classifier>exec</classifier>
        </configuration>
      </plugin>
      [...]
    </plugins>
  </build>
  [...]
</project
----

. Since this UI is going to consume REST services, its an awesome opportunity to use Feign.  Feign will handle *ALL* the work of invoking our services and marshalling/unmarshalling JSON into domain objects.  We'll add a Feign Client interface into our app.  Take note of how Feign references the downstream service; its only the name of the service it will lookup from Service Registry.
+
Add the following interface declaration to the `CloudNativeSpringUiApplication` class:
+
[source,java,numbered]
----
    @FeignClient("cloud-native-spring")
    public interface CityClient {
        @GetMapping(value = "/cities", consumes = "application/hal+json")
        Resources<City> getCities();
    }
----
+
We'll also need to add a few annotations to our boot application:
+
[source,java,numbered]
----
@SpringBootApplication
@EnableFeignClients  // <---- Add this
@EnableDiscoveryClient  // <---- And this
public class CloudNativeSpringUiApplication {
----
+
Completed:
+
[source,java,numbered]
----
package io.pivotal.cloudnativespringui;

import org.springframework.boot.SpringApplication;
import org.springframework.boot.autoconfigure.SpringBootApplication;
import org.springframework.cloud.client.discovery.EnableDiscoveryClient;
import org.springframework.cloud.netflix.feign.EnableFeignClients;
import org.springframework.cloud.netflix.feign.FeignClient;
import org.springframework.hateoas.Resources;
import org.springframework.web.bind.annotation.GetMapping;

import io.pivotal.cloudnativespring.domain.City;

@SpringBootApplication
@EnableFeignClients
@EnableDiscoveryClient
@EnableCircuitBreaker
public class CloudNativeSpringUiApplication {

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        SpringApplication.run(CloudNativeSpringUiApplication.class, args);
    }

    @FeignClient("cloud-native-spring")
    public interface CityClient {

        @GetMapping(value = "/cities", consumes = "application/hal+json")
        Resources<City> getCities();
    }
}
----

. Next we'll create a Vaadin UI for rendering our data.  The point of this workshop isn't to go into detail on creating UIs; for now suffice to say that Vaadin is a great tool for quickly creating User Interfaces.  Our UI will consume our Feign client we just created.  Create the `io.pivotal.cloudnativespringui.AppUI` class and paste the following code:
+
.cloud-native-spring-ui/src/main/java/io/pivotal/cloudnativespringui/AppUI.java
[source,java,numbered]
----
package io.pivotal.cloudnativespringui;

import java.util.ArrayList;
import java.util.Collection;

import org.springframework.beans.factory.annotation.Autowired;

import com.vaadin.annotations.Theme;
import com.vaadin.server.VaadinRequest;
import com.vaadin.spring.annotation.SpringUI;
import com.vaadin.ui.Grid;
import com.vaadin.ui.UI;

import io.pivotal.cloudnativespring.domain.City;
import io.pivotal.cloudnativespringui.CloudNativeSpringUiApplication.CityClient;

@SpringUI
@Theme("valo")
public class AppUI extends UI {

    private final CityClient cityClient;

    private final Grid<City> grid;

    @Autowired
    public AppUI(CityClient client) {
        this.cityClient = client;
        grid = new Grid<>(City.class);
    }

    @Override
    protected void init(VaadinRequest request) {
        setContent(grid);
        grid.setWidth(100, Unit.PERCENTAGE);
        grid.setHeight(100, Unit.PERCENTAGE);
        Collection<City> collection = new ArrayList<>();
        cityClient.getCities().forEach(collection::add);
        grid.setItems(collection);
    }
}
----

. We'll also want to give our UI App a name so that it can register properly with the Service Registry and potentially use cloud config in the future. The `spring-cloud-services-starter-service-registry` dependency pulls in `spring-security`, so we'll also need to disable security for our sample ui.
+
Add the following to your Spring Boot configuration:
+
.cloud-native-spring-ui/src/main/resources/application.yml
[source,yaml]
----
spring:
  application:
    name: cloud-native-spring-ui
----

== Deploy and test application

. Build the application.
+
[source,bash]
----
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work/cloud-native-spring-ui $ ./mvnw package
----

. Create a Cloud Foundry application manifest:
+
[source,bash]
----
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work/cloud-native-spring-ui $ touch manifest.yml
----
+
Add application metadata:
+
[source,yaml]
----
---
applications:
- name: cloud-native-spring-ui
  random-route: true
  memory: 768M
  path: target/cloud-native-spring-ui-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT-exec.jar
  env:
    JAVA_OPTS: -Djava.security.egd=file:///dev/urandom
  services:
  - service-registry
----
. create the circuit-breaker service
+
[source,bash]
cf create-service p-circuit-breaker-dashboard standard circuit-breaker-dashboard 

. Push application into Cloud Foundry
+
[source,bash]
----
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work/cloud-native-spring-ui $ cf push
----

. Test your application by navigating to the root URL of the application, which will invoke Vaadin UI.  You should now see a table listing the first set of rows returned from the cities microservice:
+
image::images/ui.jpg[]

. From a commandline stop the cloud-native-spring microservice (the original city service, not the new UI)
+
[source,bash]
----
CN-Workshop/labs/my_work/cloud-native-spring $ cf stop cloud-native-spring
----
. Refresh the UI app.  What happens?  Now you get a nasty error that is not very user friendly!

. Next we'll learn how to make our UI Application more resilient in the case that our downstream services are unavailable.
